# CSPT19 Sprint 1 - Computer Science Fundamentals

## Module 04 - Python IV

## [Objective 01 - Understand random access memory (RAM) as it relates to data structures](https://lambdaschool.instructure.com/courses/932/pages/objective-01-understand-random-access-memory-ram-as-it-relates-to-data-structures?module_item_id=557558)

### Overview
Your computer has something called random access memory (RAM). Sometimes, people say "memory" when referring to RAM.

### Follow Along
One thing that might come to your mind is that there are different types of memory on your computer. What about storing things like videos, text documents, and applications? Are those in "memory"? There is a distinction between `"storage"` and `"memory"`. Things like `videos and files` are stored on a `disc`, `not in RAM`. `RAM` is `faster` than `disc` storage, but there `isn't as much space` available. `Disc` storage has `more space`, but it is `slower`.

Think of `RAM` like a `set of numbered, sequential mailboxes`. Just like a set of mailboxes with numbered addresses, `RAM` is also `sequential` and `has numbered addresses`.

Now, just like you can put something in a mailbox, you can also put something in RAM. Things that you `put in RAM`, we can `call variables`. Each `"box"` in `RAM` `has an address`.

Each one of the `"boxes" (memory addresses)` in our `set of mailboxes (RAM)` holds `8 bits`. You can think of `each bit like a tiny switch` that can either be `"on" or "off."` `"On"` is represented by a `1`, and `"off"` is represented by a `0`.

Bits are often thought about in groups. A group of `8 bits` is called `a byte`. Each `"box"` in `RAM` can hold `1 byte (8 bits)`.

Now, a computer has more than just disc storage and RAM inside of it. There is also a processor. And, in `between the processor and the RAM` is something called a `memory controller`. The `memory controller` can `access each box in RAM` directly. It is as if the memory controller had tubes connected to each box of the set of mailboxes. Through those tubes, the memory controller can send and receive information directly to each box in RAM.

**Why is the direct connection between the memory controller and each box in RAM meaningful?**  
It's so that the `memory controller can jump around` to which box it wants to communicate with `quickly`. Even though the boxes are in sequential order, the `memory controller doesn't have to go through the boxes in order`. It can access the first one, then jump to one somewhere in the middle, and then access one at the end. Because `there is a direct connection`, this is done quickly.

Whenever you use a computer, you are very concerned with the `speed of the computer` you are using. So, computer designers made a way to `optimize for speed` when accessing `items in RAM`. Whenever a processor accesses a box in RAM, it also accesses and stores the boxes near it. Often, if you are accessing one thing in RAM, it's likely that the next thing you need to access is nearby. That's why `keeping a copy of nearby items in the cache speeds things up`.

Whenever the `processor reads something` (say, the player's position in an old adventure game) `out of RAM`, it `adds it to the cache` to use it again in the future. Then, when it needs something else from RAM, it will go to the cache for it. As you can see, `the cache helps the processor` by `saving execution cycles` required to go out and read something from RAM.

The `processor`, not RAM, `has the actual cache`. The `memory controller` `keeps track` of what goes into and comes out of `the cache`.

We can think of it in several ways. Perhaps, the processor can use the cache as a temporary area to keep a copy of its last actions just in case it needs to reread them.

There is `one caveat` — it is not as if "everything" goes out to RAM and then gets inserted into the cache. In reality, the `cache holds only a handful of memory addresses from RAM`. Also, note that these `few memory addresses in the cache` can be `accessed faster than other storage locations`.

### Challenge
- Draw a model of how a processor interacts with the cache, memory controller, and RAM whenever it needs to read or write from memory.

### Additional Resources
- [Random-access memory - Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Random-access_memory)
- [Memory controller - Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Memory_controller)
- [CPU cache - Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CPU_cache)

## [Objective 02 - Convert back and forth from decimal to binary](https://lambdaschool.instructure.com/courses/932/pages/objective-02-convert-back-and-forth-from-decimal-to-binary?module_item_id=557561)

### Overview
Computers use the `binary number system`, so we will represent all of our variables in the binary number system.

Instead of 10 digits like 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 0, the binary number system only has two possible digits, `1` and `0`. Another way to think of it is that computers only have switches (bits) that can be in an `"off state"` or an `"on state"`.

### Follow Along
Before we try to understand the binary number system, let's review how the decimal number system works. Let's look at the number "1001" in decimal.

Even though there are two "1" digits in this number, they don't represent the same quantity. The leftmost "1" represents one thousand, and the rightmost "1" represents one unit. The "0"s in-between represent the tens place, and the hundreds place.

So this "1001" in base ten represents "1 thousand, 0 hundreds, 0 tens, and 1 one."

Each successive digit in the `base 10` number system is a `power of ten`. The ones place is 10^0 = 1. The tens place is 10^1 = 10. The hundreds place is 10^2 = 100. This pattern continues on and on.

This pattern holds for other number systems as well. In the `binary system`, each successive digit represents a different `power of 2`. The first digit represents `2^0 = 1`. The second digit represents `2^1 = 2`. The third digit represents `2^2 = 4`. Again, this pattern continues on and on.

So, what if the number "1001" was in binary and not decimal? What would it represent then? Well, if we read it right to left, we have a `"1"` in the `ones` place, a `"0"` in the `twos` place, a `"0"` in the `fours` place, and a `"1"` in the `eights` place. We add these values up `(8 + 0 + 0 + 1)` which equals 9.

Below, is a table that shows how to count up to 8 in binary and decimal:

| Decimal | Binary |
| --- | --- |
| 0 | 0000 |
| 1 | 0001 |
| 2 | 0010 |
| 3 | 0011 |
| 4 | 0100 |
| 5 | 0101 |
| 6 | 0110 |
| 7 | 0111 |
| 8 | 1000 |

### Challenge
Convert the following decimal numbers into binary numbers:

1. 25 ---> 00011001 (16 + 8 + 1)
2. 63 ---> 00111111 (32 + 16 + 8 + 4 + 2 + 1)
3. 9  ---> 00001001 (8 + 1)
4. 111 ---> 01101111 (64 + 32 + 8 + 4 + 2 + 1)

### Additional Resources
- [Binary Number System](https://www.mathsisfun.com/binary-number-system.html)
- [Decimal Number System](https://www.mathsisfun.com/definitions/decimal-number-system.html)

## [Objective 03 - Understand how fixed-width integers are stored in memory](https://lambdaschool.instructure.com/courses/932/pages/objective-03-understand-how-fixed-width-integers-are-stored-in-memory?module_item_id=557565)


