# CSPT19 Sprint 4 - Data Structures and Algorithms III

## Module 2 - Hash Tables II

* [Lecture with Mari Batilando](https://youtu.be/kBejF3oz-xA)

* [Slides for the Lecture](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1CYg8k9xQjhrRVHtSUunAomu5it9lZeMIonTkiuTifjM/edit#slide=id.gb5fd04457f_0_218)

* [Mari's Solution Code](https://hackmd.io/@sIQnCbQ0T56A3KLAiNrlhQ/ByL9bh1wu)

* [Previous Module Project Solutions](https://hackmd.io/@sIQnCbQ0T56A3KLAiNrlhQ/r1zQUGu-u)

## Hash Tables: Things to know

- There’s many use-cases for hash-tables in programming problems
    - Will not need to actually implement a hash table with python.
    - Will mostly be just using `dictionaries` and `sets`, which are using hash tables under the hood.
- Hash-and-store: Use `O(1)` get/store/delete operations in dictionaries/sets to solve the problem faster, at the expense of additional space
    - You hash a lot of things so that you do not have to do a lot of repetitive work
    - This does come at the expense of additional space but will save on time complexity.

## [771. Jewels and Stones](https://leetcode.com/problems/jewels-and-stones/)

**Problem Description:**

You're given strings `jewels` representing the types of stones that are `jewels`, and `stones` representing the stones you have. Each character in stones is a type of stone you have. You want to know how many of the stones you have are also jewels.

Letters are case sensitive, so `"a"` is considered a different type of stone from `"A"`.

**Example 1:**

```
Input: jewels = "aA", stones = "aAAbbbb"
Output: 3
```

**Example 2:**

```
Input: jewels = "z", stones = "ZZ"
Output: 0
```

**Constraints:**

- `1 <= jewels.length`, `stones.length <= 50`
- `jewels` and `stones` consist of only English letters.
- All the characters of `jewels` are **unique**.

```
class Solution:
    """
    Understand:
        - `jewels` -> string representing the types of stones
        - `stones` -> string representing the stones you have
        - Need to return how many of the stones you have are jewels
        - Case matters... "a" does not == "A"
        
    My Plan:
        - Create a counter variable
        - Create a dictionary to hold each stone as a key and the number of times it appears in stones as the value.
        - Populate the dictionary for the stones.
        - Compare the jewels list to the dictionary keys.
        - If a value in jewels == a key in the dictionary, add that value to the counter
        - Return the counter.
        
    Mari's Brute-force Plan:
        For each stone, check if the stone is in the jewels string
        Keep track of how many stones are jewels
        return that count
        
    Mari's hash and store plan:
        Store each jewel in a set, then check if the stone is in that set
    """
    def numJewelsInStones(self, jewels: str, stones: str) -> int:
        # ##### Brute Force Solution ##### #
#         # Create a counter to keep track of the number of jewels
#         num_jewels = 0
        
#         # For each stone in our stones list...
#         for stone in stones:  # O(n)
#             # Check if the stone is in the jewels list
#             if stone in jewels:  # O(n)
#                 # Increment jewel counter if stone is a jewel
#                 num_jewels += 1
                
#         # Return the number of jewels we have
#         return num_jewels

        # ###### Hash and Store Solution ###### #
        # Create a counter to keep track of the number of jewels
        num_jewels = 0
        # Create a set with the list of jewels
        jewels = set(list(jewels))  # S: O(n)
        
        # For each stone in our stone list...
        for stone in stones:  # T: O(n)
            # If the stone is a jewel...
            if stone in jewels:  # T: O(1)
                # # Increment jewel counter if stone is a jewel
                num_jewels += 1
        
        # Return the number of jewels we have in our stones
        return num_jewels
    
```

## [1365. How Many Numbers Are Smaller Than the Current Number](https://leetcode.com/problems/how-many-numbers-are-smaller-than-the-current-number/)

**Problem Description:**

Given the array `nums`, for each `nums[i]` find out how many numbers in the array are smaller than it. That is, for each `nums[i]` you have to count the number of valid `j's` such that `j != i` **and** `nums[j] < nums[i]`.

Return the answer in an array.

**Example 1:**

```
Input: nums = [8,1,2,2,3]
Output: [4,0,1,1,3]
Explanation: 
For nums[0]=8 there exist four smaller numbers than it (1, 2, 2 and 3). 
For nums[1]=1 does not exist any smaller number than it.
For nums[2]=2 there exist one smaller number than it (1). 
For nums[3]=2 there exist one smaller number than it (1). 
For nums[4]=3 there exist three smaller numbers than it (1, 2 and 2).
```

**Example 2:**

```
Input: nums = [6,5,4,8]
Output: [2,1,0,3]
```

**Example 3:**

```
Input: nums = [7,7,7,7]
Output: [0,0,0,0]
```

**Constraints:**

- `2 <= nums.length <= 500`
- `0 <= nums[i] <= 100`

```
class Solution:
    """
    Understand:
        - Given list of `nums` containing integers
        - Need to return how many numbers are < nums[i] for each nums[i] in a list
        
    My Plan:
        - Create a dictionary to hold the num[i] value as the key and the number of values < num[i] as the value
        - Populate the dictionary
        - If a value < nums[i], increment the value count for the key (nums[i])
        - Return the values from the dictionary in a list
    """
    def smallerNumbersThanCurrent(self, nums: List[int]) -> List[int]:
#         # ###### Brute Force Solution ###### #
#         # Create a results list
#         res = []
        
#         # Get the index location and number in nums
#         for i, num in enumerate(nums):
#             # Create a counter to count the smaller numbers
#             num_smaller = 0
            
#             # Create another pointer to iterate through nums
#             for j, other_num in enumerate(nums):
#                 # Check if i is equal to j
#                 if i == j:
#                     continue
                
#                 # If the other numbers are < current num
#                 if other_num < num:
#                     # Increment number of smaller nums
#                     num_smaller += 1
            
#             # Add the number of smaller numbers to the end of the results
#             res.append(num_smaller)
        
#         # Return the results list
#         return res
    
    
        # ###### Hash and Store Solution ###### #
        # Create a list of sorted nums
        sort_nums = sorted(nums)  # T: O(n log n)
        # Create a map of the original nums
        num_map = {}  # maps from num -> count of other nums < num
        
        # Iterate through the sorted numbers
        for i, num in enumerate(sort_nums):
            # If the number is not in the number map
            if num not in num_map:
                # Add the number to the number map
                num_map[num] = i
        
        # Create a results list
        results = []
        
        # Iterate throught the numbers in the nums list
        for num in nums:
            # Add the number to the results list
            results.append(num_map[num])
        
        # Return the results list
        return results
    
```

## Other Types of Interviews

- There are other types of interviews besides general data structure/algorithmic interviews
- Other common types of interviews:
    - Screening (usually first interview)
    - Behavioral (soft skills)
    - Role-specific (techincal based on your role)
    - System Design (more for senior roles)
- Allocate your practice accordingly depending on the companies you’re applying for
    - Different companies care about different skills
    - It is okay to ask ahead of time what type of things you need to prepare for.

## Screening Interviews

- Usually the first interview when applying
- Evaluate your qualifications and see if you would be a potential fit for the role
- Clarify any questions about your resume
- Ask about motivations in applying and what you’re looking for
- Mostly non-technical and conducted by recruiters

## Behavioral Interviews

- Understand your behavior in a working environment
- Ask about your soft-skills and working experience in a team
- There’s usually at least one round of this during full-time/intern interviews
- Usually conducted by managers

## STAR Method

- A popular framework to answer behavioral questions
- Tell me about a challenging situation you had at work
- **S**ituation - Setup and describe the situation
    - *I was on-call and I got an alert that errors for our main backend service were spiking in the middle of the night.*
- **T**ask - Explain your responsibility in the situation
    - *As on-call, my role is to make sure our services are stable and to triage/mitigate escalations when they happen.*
- **A**ction - Describe the actions you took to accomplish the task
    - *I looked at the timeline for when the errors started, along with the changes that were made at that time. I found the offending change and reverted it.*
- **R**esults - State the outcome of your actions
    - *The errors, which affected X users was mitigated in Y minutes. I also led a post-mortem afterwards, which led to creating more automated tests to prevent it from happening again.*

## Role-Specific Interviews

- Deep-dive into your domain-specific knowledge (e.g. iOS, Android, Front-end Web, AI/ML, etc.)
    - The types of questions you will get in these interviews really vary depending on what role you’re applying for. For example, if you’re applying for an Android/iOS role, they might ask you about the design patterns you use when building an app, or the frameworks you use. Some interviews even have you make a simple app/feature or even fix a bug in their codebase. There are so many things that a company can ask you. The main goal in this interview is for the interviewer to see how well you know the technologies you would be using day-to-day.
- Could also be mixed with an algorithmic/data-structures interview
    - Sometimes role-specific questions can be mixed in a coding interview. So you can expect a hybrid interview where you might get asked role-specific questions + data structure/algorithmic questions.
- Some companies have switched to fully doing these types of interviews (e.g. startups)
    - This type of interview has become pretty popular over the years, especially for startups. Some big companies are even doing more of these and are seeing the benefits of this type of interview. BUT, a lot of companies are still doing generalist type of interviews, so you should be able to do well in both types of interviews.

## System Design Interviews

- Usually for experienced hires, not common for interns/new grads
    - You probably won’t encounter this type of interview yet, since y’all are applying to new grad/intern roles. But, you should be aware of these types of interviews since these are asked for mid-senior level roles.
- Understand how well you’re able to design an end-to-end system that is either in/out of your normal domain of expertise
    - The main goal of this type of interview is to get a sense of how well you’re able to architect end-to-end systems given a set of constraints. The interviewer wants to know how both how broad your knowledge is, as well as how in-depth you can go into building components of a system. I won’t spend too much time talking about this type of interview, because you probably won’t encounter this in your interviews. Just be aware that this is on the horizon as you get more experienced.
- Some companies use this to determine level in hiring
    - Some companies use your performance in this interview to gauge your seniority. So, this type of interview is very important to crack as you become more senior.
- Instead, you might be asked an Object-oriented programming (OOP) question

## Extra Tips

- Check [glassdoor](https://www.glassdoor.com/member/home/index.htm) interview section is a good resource to go to in order to find out what types of things the company may ask in the interview.
- [levels.fyi](https://www.levels.fyi/) is a good place to go for salary expectations
