# CSPT19 Sprint 4 - Data Structures and Algorithms III

## Module 3 - Careers Lectures from Tamika Doolin and Lindsey Baltz

* [Lecture with Mari Batilando]()

* [Slides for the Lecture]()

* [Previous Module Project Solutions]()

## Lecture from Tamika Doolin

Do companies *actually* hire lambda grads?

### Purpose:
- To help you prepare for the job search.
- Friendship:
    - Maintain friendship in hopes of referring other Lambda students
- Improvement:
    - 
- Feedback Loop:
    - Lambda gets feedback from companies and other Lambda alumni
- Confidence:
    - 

**RESEARCH THE JOB**

> "The call with ______ went fine. He followed up pretty quickly with ideas which is great. But we did not get a great first impression. Surprisingly, he **had no idea what we did**, on a basic level. **No research at all is an automatic "no"**."

> "Candidate was fun to talk with. Not quite at skill level looking for. Also wanted **more research** - could not answer question about what"

> 

### Detail Oriented: What **NOT** to do...
1. A student emailed an interviewer and spelled their name wrong
2. A student called the interviewer the 
3. A student the spelled the company name wrong
4. Missed interview because of time zones/method of interviewing

> What was surprising was that several students came across more casual than I would have liked ("that's awesome, man", "damn", "oh man", etc.)
- You want to be personable but not too comfortable



### Behavioral Feedback:



### Technical Feedback:



## Lecture from Lindsey Baltz - Talking about your projects

### Submitting an application
1. Review the job description - highlight anything you have even a little experience in
2. Make sure your resume reflects that experience
3. Higher on the job description = higher on the employer's priority list (usually)

### Before you start applying: Build your foundation
1. List every project you've worked on
2. 

### Each Interview: Tailor your interview prep

1. Ask the recruiter for the interview format and any tips. 
2. Research everyone you will be meeting with. What are their priorities?
3. Research the company and team, to the extent possible

### Cardinal rule of interviewing:

Never, **ever**, under ***any*** circumstance, answer a question with "I don't know." Unless it's followed by a "but..."

"I don't know." will **never** be the right answer. Promise.

### Common Challenges / Concerns

> "I did the back end but the front end looks terrible. Is it okay to just talk about the BE work and ignore the FE?"

> "I'm not prouf of any of the projects I worked on."

> "None of my projects are done or deployed."

> "I don't have any good challenges to talk about."
- Unless you have breezed through Lambda and exceeded expectations on everything, you have come across some kind of challenge, even if it was small.

> "How do I highlight my contributions to a team project?"
- 

### S . T . A . R .
- (**S**)ituation:
    - 
- (**T**)ask:
    - 
- (**A**)ction:
    - 
- (**R**)esult:
    - 
